feat: 8-23-2024 WARA Automation Release (#367)
Azure/Azure-Proactive-Resiliency-Library-v2: docs/content/tools/collector/_index.md

---
title: Well-Architected Reliability Assessment (WARA) collector script
weight: 10
geekdocCollapseSection: false
---

{{< toc >}}

# Well-Architected Reliability Assessment (WARA) Collector Script

## Description

This script is part of the Microsoft Well-Architected Reliability Assessment (WARA) engagement. It helps customers validate whether their Azure resources are architected and configured according to Microsoft best practices. The script achieves this by running Azure Resource Graph queries (Kusto/KQL) against Azure subscriptions and resources. Additionally, it collects information about closed support tickets, active Azure Advisor reliability recommendations, past Azure Service Health retirement and outage notifications, and the configuration of Azure Service Health alerts, all of which are relevant for the reliability recommendations provided at the end of the engagement. The collected data is then structured and exported into a JSON file, which is later used as input for the second script, the Data Analyzer script (2_wara_data_analyzer.ps1).

> **Important:** These Azure Resource Graph queries only read ARM (Azure Resource Manager) data. They do not access or collect any keys, secrets, passwords, or other confidential information. The queries only gather information about how resources are deployed and configured. If you would like to learn more, you can explore the Azure Resource Graph Explorer and run some of the query examples provided in the Azure portal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< hint type=important >}} 
These Azure Resource Graph queries only read ARM (Azure Resource Manager) data. They do not access or collect any keys, secrets, passwords, or other confidential information. The queries only gather information about how resources are deployed and configured. If you would like to learn more, you can explore the Azure Resource Graph Explorer and run some of the query examples provided in the Azure portal.
{{< /hint >}}
```

    - If this is your first time using Cloud Shell, refer to the getting started guide from Microsoft Learn - [Azure Cloud Shell](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/cloud-shell/get-started/classic?tabs=azurecli#start-cloud-shell).

    {{< figure src="../../img/tools/collector-1.png" width="100%" >}}

2. Upload the WARA Collector Script to Cloud Shell
  {{< figure src="../../img/tools/collector-2.png" width="60%" >}}

    Or download the script from GitHub

    ```shell
    iwr https://aka.ms/aprl/tools/1 -out 1_wara_collector.ps1
    ```

3. Execute script leveraging parameters
   - The script accepts both short and/or full paths.

    {{< figure src="../../img/tools/collector-3.png" width="100%" >}}

    For complex Subscription, ResourceGroups and Tags filtering scenarios we highly recommend using [ConfigFiles - See here an example under config.txt in Example 5](#example-5)

4. Select "A" to allow modules to install
  {{< figure src="../../img/tools/collector-4.png" width="100%" >}}

1. After Script completes, download the produced json file to your machine
  {{< figure src="../../img/tools/collector-5.png" width="100%" >}}

> 1. Read how to execute the [Analyzer Script](../analyzer/_index.md) to generate the Excel report.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. From the [Azure Portal](https://portal.azure.com/) open Cloud Shell, select PowerShell instead of BASH

    - If this is your first time using Cloud Shell, refer to the getting started guide from Microsoft Learn - [Azure Cloud Shell](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/cloud-shell/get-started/classic?tabs=azurecli#start-cloud-shell).

    {{< figure src="../../img/tools/collector-1.png" width="100%" >}}

1. Upload the WARA Collector Script to Cloud Shell
  {{< figure src="../../img/tools/collector-2.png" width="60%" >}}

    Or download the script from GitHub

    ```shell
    iwr https://aka.ms/aprl/tools/1 -out 1_wara_collector.ps1
    ```

1. Execute script leveraging parameters
   - The script accepts both short and/or full paths.

    {{< figure src="../../img/tools/collector-3.png" width="100%" >}}

    For complex Subscription, ResourceGroups and Tags filtering scenarios we highly recommend using [ConfigFiles - See here an example under config.txt in Example 5](#example-5)

1. Select "A" to allow modules to install
  {{< figure src="../../img/tools/collector-4.png" width="100%" >}}

1. After Script completes, download the produced json file to your machine
  {{< figure src="../../img/tools/collector-5.png" width="100%" >}}

1. Read how to execute the [Analyzer Script](../analyzer/_index.md) to generate the Excel report.
```

### 1.2 Local Machine

> 1. To run the script there are 5 prerequisites that must be completed first:
>     1. **The script must be executed from PowerShell 7. Other versions are not supported, for example: Windows PowerShell and PowerShell ISE**
>       {{< figure src="../../img/tools/collector-6.png" width="40%" >}}
>     2. **Git must be installed on the local machine - [Git](https://git-scm.com/download/win)**
>     3. **Install required PowerShell Modules:**
>         - `Install-Module -Name ImportExcel -Force -SkipPublisherCheck`
>         - `Install-Module -Name Az.ResourceGraph -SkipPublisherCheck`
>         - `Install-Module -Name Az.Accounts -SkipPublisherCheck`
>     4. **Unblock the Script**
>         - So at this moment, you need to allow the execution of scripts not signed locally:
>           - `Set-ExecutionPolicy -ExecutionPolicy Unrestricted -Scope CurrentUser`
>           - `Set-ExecutionPolicy -ExecutionPolicy Unrestricted -Scope LocalMachine`
>     5. **Reader permissions to target subscription(s)**
> 
> 2. Open a new **PowerShell 7 session** after completing prerequisites
> 
> 3. Change your directory to the same location where you are hosting your WARA Collector script.
> 
>     - We recommend running this as close to your `C:\` as path to avoid errors related to file path length. Create a `c:\wara\` folder and save all scripts in this folder.
>     {{< figure src="../../img/tools/collector-7.png" width="40%" >}}
> 
> 4. Access the folder `c:\wara\` and Execute script leveraging the necessary parameters
> 
>    - {{< figure src="../../img/tools/collector-8.png" width="100%" >}}
> 
> 5. Authenticate with the account that has Reader permissions to the target subscription(s)
>   {{< figure src="../../img/tools/collector-9.png" width="40%" >}}
> 
> 6. After script completes, a json file with all the results will be saved to the same folder location.
> 
> 7. Read how to execute the [Analyzer Script](../analyzer/_index.md) to generate the Excel report.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. To run the script there are 5 prerequisites that must be completed first:
    1. **The script must be executed from PowerShell 7. Other versions are not supported, for example: Windows PowerShell and PowerShell ISE**
      {{< figure src="../../img/tools/collector-6.png" width="40%" >}}
    1. **Git must be installed on the local machine - [Git](https://git-scm.com/download/win)**
    1. **Install required PowerShell Modules:**
        - `Install-Module -Name ImportExcel -Force -SkipPublisherCheck`
        - `Install-Module -Name Az.ResourceGraph -SkipPublisherCheck`
        - `Install-Module -Name Az.Accounts -SkipPublisherCheck`
    1. **Unblock the Script**
        - So at this moment, you need to allow the execution of scripts not signed locally:
          - `Set-ExecutionPolicy -ExecutionPolicy Unrestricted -Scope CurrentUser`
          - `Set-ExecutionPolicy -ExecutionPolicy Unrestricted -Scope LocalMachine`
    1. **Reader permissions to target subscription(s)**

1. Open a new **PowerShell 7 session** after completing prerequisites

1. Change your directory to the same location where you are hosting your WARA Collector script.

    - We recommend running this as close to your `C:\` as path to avoid errors related to file path length. Create a `c:\wara\` folder and save all scripts in this folder.
    {{< figure src="../../img/tools/collector-7.png" width="40%" >}}

1. Access the folder `c:\wara\` and Execute script leveraging the necessary parameters

   - {{< figure src="../../img/tools/collector-8.png" width="100%" >}}

1. Authenticate with the account that has Reader permissions to the target subscription(s)
  {{< figure src="../../img/tools/collector-9.png" width="40%" >}}

1. After script completes, a json file with all the results will be saved to the same folder location.

1. Read how to execute the [Analyzer Script](../analyzer/_index.md) to generate the Excel report.
```

> <br>
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Resource Filtering

The filtering capabilities are designed for targeting specific Azure resources, enabling precise and flexible reliability assessments. The scope of the feature includes functionalities that allow users to define the scope and tags and criteria of their reliability checks using parameters or text files.

### Order of operations

1. Subscriptions
   - Subscription scopes like `-SubscriptionIds "/subscriptions/00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000"` or `[subscriptionIds]`
`/subscriptions/11111111-1111-1111-1111-111111111111` in a configuration file always take explicit precedence over any smaller, more specific scope.
2. Resource Groups
   - These scopes can be used explicitly where you need to grab a resource group from a subscription but not evaluate the whole subscription.

> 3. Tags

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Subscriptions
   - Subscription scopes like `-SubscriptionIds "/subscriptions/00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000"` or `[subscriptionIds]`
`/subscriptions/11111111-1111-1111-1111-111111111111` in a configuration file always take explicit precedence over any smaller, more specific scope.
1. Resource Groups
   - These scopes can be used explicitly where you need to grab a resource group from a subscription but not evaluate the whole subscription.
1. Tags
```

In the configFile.txt the configuration looks like:

```text
[tags]
App||Application=~App1||App2
env||environment=~prod||production
```

In PowerShell command line the configuration looks like:

```powershell
-tags "App||Application=~App1||App2","env||environment=~prod||production""
```

- Our next example will demonstrate how we can filter using a `NOT` operator. This will return all resources in scope, except those that meet the requirements of `app` or `application` not equalling `App3`, `env` or `environment` not equalling `dev` or `qa`.

In the configFile.txt the configuration looks like:

```text
[tags]
App||Application!~App3
env||environment!~dev||qa
```

In PowerShell command line the configuration looks like:

```powershell
-tags "App||Application!~App3","env||environment!~dev||qa""
```

## Runbooks

> > __Important__: Runbooks are an advanced feature designed for specific workload-aligned use cases. If you're not sure if you need runbooks, you probably don't. Before diving into runbooks, [try using the filtering feature to see if it meets your needs](#resource-filtering).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< hint type=important >}}
Runbooks are an advanced feature designed for specific workload-aligned use cases. If you're not sure if you need runbooks, you probably don't. Before diving into runbooks, [try using the filtering feature to see if it meets your needs](#resource-filtering).
{{< /hint >}}
```

Learn more about using runbooks with the WARA collector script in the [runbooks docs](runbooks.md).

## How to run the 1_wara_collector.ps1

### Example 1

The workload is entirely hosted in a single subscription that is not shared with other workloads:

Provide parameters in command line:

```powershell
.\1_wara_collector.ps1 -TenantID "00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000" -SubscriptionIds "/subscriptions/00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000"
```

Provide parameters via ConfigFile:

```powershell
.\Wara_Collector.ps1 -configFile config.txt
```

config.txt

```text
[tenantId]
00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000

[subscriptionIds]
/subscriptions/00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000
```

### Example 2

> The workload is hosted in two subscriptions (Sub-0 and Sub-5), but Sub 5 subscription is shared with other workloads and I want to filter the Sub-5 subscription by a single ResourceGroup where the components of my workload are hosted:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The workload is hosted in two subscriptions (Sub-0 and Sub-5), but the Sub-5 subscription is shared with other workloads. I want to filter it by a single ResourceGroup specifically where the components of my workload are hosted:
```

Provide parameters in command line:

```powershell
.\1_wara_collector.ps1 -TenantID "00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000" -SubscriptionIds "/subscriptions/00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000" -ResourceGroups "/subscriptions/55555555-5555-5555-5555-555555555555/resourceGroups/RG-1"
```

Provide parameters via ConfigFile:

```powershell
.\Wara_Collector.ps1 -configFile config.txt
```

config.txt

```text
[tenantId]
00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000

[subscriptionIds]
/subscriptions/00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000

[resourceGroups]
/subscriptions/55555555-5555-5555-5555-555555555555/resourceGroups/RG-1
```

> **Important**: Note that since you are filtering Sub-5 by ResourceGroup, you do not pass Sub-5 in the Subscriptions parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< hint type=important >}}  
As you're filtering Sub-5 by ResourceGroup, do not pass Sub-5 in the Subscriptions parameter.
{{< /hint >}} 
```

### Example 3

> The workload is hosted in three subscriptions (Sub-0, Sub-3 and Sub-5), but Sub 5 subscription is shared with other workloads and I want to not only filter the Sub-5 subscription by a single ResourceGroup where the components of my workload are hosted but also I need to filter by two Tags called Criticality and Env, since all my subscriptions are hosting NonProduction resources too:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The workload is hosted in three subscriptions (Sub-0, Sub-3, and Sub-5). However, since the Sub-5 subscription is shared with other workloads, I need to filter it not only by a specific Resource Group where the components of my workload are hosted but also by two tags, Criticality and Env, as all my subscriptions are hosting non-production resources as well.
```

```powershell
.\1_wara_collector.ps1 -TenantID "00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000" -SubscriptionIds "/subscriptions/00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000","/subscriptions/33333333-3333-3333-3333-333333333333" -ResourceGroups "/subscriptions/55555555-5555-5555-5555-555555555555/resourceGroups/RG-1" -Tags 'Criticality=~High','Env=~Prod'
```

Provide parameters via ConfigFile:

```powershell
.\1_Wara_Collector.ps1 -configFile config.txt
```

config.txt

```text
[tenantid]
00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000

[subscriptionIds]
/subscriptions/00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000
/subscriptions/33333333-3333-3333-3333-333333333333

[resourceGroups]
/subscriptions/55555555-5555-5555-5555-555555555555/resourceGroups/RG-1

[tags]
Criticality=~High
Env=~Prod
```

> **Important**: Note that since you are filtering Sub-5 by ResourceGroup, you do not pass Sub-5 in the Subscriptions parameter. In this scenario, the script will set as scope all resources in Sub-0 and Sub-3, and in Sub5/RG1, as long as they all have both Tags, Criticality and Env equal to the values that I defined, High and Prod. Resource that do meet these requirements will be put in a separate array called  "out-of-scope", you will see a Worksheet in the excel file with this name and all resources not validated by the tool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< hint type=important >}}  
NAS you're filtering Sub-5 by ResourceGroup, you do not pass Sub-5 in the Subscriptions parameter. In this scenario, the script will set as scope all resources in Sub-0 and Sub-3, and in Sub5/RG1, as long as they all have both Tags, Criticality and Env equal to the values that I defined, High and Prod. Resource that do meet these requirements will be put in a separate array called  "out-of-scope", you will see a Worksheet in the excel file with this name and all resources not validated by the tool.
{{< /hint >}}  
```

### Example 4

> The workload is hosted in three subscriptions (Sub-0, Sub-4 and Sub-5), but Sub4 and Sub-5 subscriptions are shared with other workloads and I want to not only filter them by ResourceGroups where the components of my workload are hosted but also I need to filter by two Tags called Criticality and Env, since all my subscriptions are hosting NonProduction resources too:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The workload is hosted in three subscriptions (Sub-0, Sub-4, and Sub-5). However, since the Sub-4 and Sub-5 subscriptions are shared with other workloads, I need to filter them not only by the Resource Groups where the components of my workload are hosted but also by two tags, Criticality and Env, as all my subscriptions are hosting non-production resources as well.
```

```powershell
.\1_wara_collector.ps1 -TenantID "00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000" -SubscriptionIds "/subscriptions/00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000" -ResourceGroups "/subscriptions/55555555-5555-5555-5555-555555555555/resourceGroups/RG-1","
","/subscriptions/44444444-4444-4444-4444-444444444444/resourceGroups/RG-2" -Tags 'Criticality=~High','Env=~Prod'
```

Provide parameters via ConfigFile:

```powershell
.\Wara_Collector.ps1 -configFile config.txt
```

config.txt

```text
[tenantid]
00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000

[subscriptionIds]
/subscriptions/00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000

[resourceGroups]
/subscriptions/55555555-5555-5555-5555-555555555555/resourceGroups/RG-1
/subscriptions/44444444-4444-4444-4444-444444444444/resourceGroups/RG-2

[tags]
Criticality=~High
Env=~Prod
```

> **Note**: Multiple values do not have to be in the same subscription. You can specify multiple resource groups in unique subscriptions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< hint type=note >}}  
Multiple values do not have to be in the same subscription. You can specify multiple resource groups in unique subscriptions.
{{< /hint >}}  
```

> **Note**: In a configuration file we separate multiple entries for a filter by new lines. Where as, from the command line we would pass multiple subscriptions or resource groups using the "string1","string2" pattern. The configuration file is useful for repeated runs, or numerous filters where it may be difficult to troubleshoot syntax in the command line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< hint type=note >}}  
In the configuration file, we separate multiple entries for a filter by new lines. Where as, from the command line we would pass multiple subscriptions or resource groups using the "string1","string2" pattern. The configuration file is useful for repeated runs, or numerous filters where it may be difficult to troubleshoot syntax in the command line.
{{< /hint >}}  
```

### Example 5

> The workload is hosted in three subscriptions (Sub-0, Sub-4 and Sub-5), but Sub4 and Sub-5 subscriptions are shared with other workloads and I want to not only filter them by ResourceGroups where the components of my workload are hosted, but also I need to filter by two groups of Tags called Criticality and Env or Environment, since all my subscriptions are hosting NonProduction resources, I want to make sure QA and DEV are excluded from my assessment:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The workload is hosted across three subscriptions (Sub-0, Sub-4, and Sub-5). Since Sub-4 and Sub-5 are shared with other workloads, I need to filter them by specific Resource Groups where my workload components are located, as well as by two sets of tags: 'Criticality' and 'Env' (or 'Environment'). This filtering will ensure that non-production resources, such as QA and DEV environments, are excluded from my assessment.
```

```

config.txt

```text
[tenantId]
00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000

[subscriptionIds]
/subscriptions/00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000

[resourceGroups]
/subscriptions/55555555-5555-5555-5555-555555555555/resourceGroups/RG-1
/subscriptions/44444444-4444-4444-4444-444444444444/resourceGroups/RG-2

[tags]
Criticality=~High
Env||Environment!~Dev||QA
```

### Runbook Example

> Learn more about runbooks [here](runbooks.md).

Run a runbook.

```powershell
.\1_wara_collector.ps1 `
  -TenantID "00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000" `
  -SubscriptionIds "/subscriptions/00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000" `
  -RunbookFile ".\runbook.json"
```

Run a runbook using implicit runbook selectors.

```powershell
.\1_wara_collector.ps1 `
  -TenantID "00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000" `
  -SubscriptionIds "/subscriptions/00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000" `
  -RunbookFile ".\runbook.json"
  -UseImplicitRunbookSelectors
```

> Note that `-SubscriptionIds` are required when using a runbook. Runbooks are not compatible with `-ConfigFile`, `-ResourceGroups`,  `-Tags`, `-SAP`, `-AVS`, `-HPC`, `-AVD` parameters. Specify subscriptions in scope using `-SubscriptionIds` parameter.

> <br>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
